Genesis 1 verse 27 to 28.
So God created mankind in his own image.
In the image of God, he created them.
Male and female, he created them.
God blessed them and said to them, be fruitful and increase in number.
Fill the earth and subdue it.
Rule over the fish and the sea and the birds in the sky and over every living creature that moves on the ground.
Revelation 22, beginning in verse one.
Then the angel showed me the river of water of life as clear as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb, down the middle of the street, down the middle of the great street of the city.
On each side of the river stood the tree of life, bearing 12 crops of fruit, yielding its fruit every month.
and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
No longer will there be any curse.
The throne of God and the lamb will be in the city and his servants will serve him.
They will see his face and his name will be on their foreheads.
There will be no more night.
They will not need the light of a lamp or the light of the sun.
For the Lord God will give them light and they will reign with him forever.
endeavor.
This is the word of the Lord.
If you follow 33rd Street North, you'll pass through Irvington's shaded sidewalks and fancy houses and through Killingsworth's buzzing, trendy scene of restaurants and stores.
You'll eventually run squarely into the Oregon side of the Columbia River.
And it's dotted with all the places that you want in your city generally, but don't want to visit personally, the DMV, the FedEx and UPS shipping centers, and an Amazon assembly warehouse.
And my friend Alec, who now serves on the pastoral staff of this church, got his start in Portland making ends meet on the assembly line at that warehouse.
So when he goes to work tomorrow morning, it will actually be to hear.
He will come to this sacred building, pastoring and shepherding disciples of Jesus on the narrow way to life.
But a couple of years ago, he would leave this sacred building on Sundays to go stand on the Amazon assembly line on Monday.
So here's my question.
What interest does God have in that workplace?
Because the Amazon warehouse charged with the very sacred reverence of the pastoral office.
And if not, what's Alec to do with the majority of his conscious life?
Because work is where we spend it.
And if so, how does that work out in practice?
Because that's a convenient and dignifying theory.
But how do you live that while putting packaging tape down the creases of hundreds of boxes?
What interest does God have in that workplace?
And to ask you personally, what interest does God have in my workplace?
Be it an architecture firm or the demanding clients that you're seeing as a freelance designer, the demanding kids you, parents as a full-time parent, the demanding classroom you oversee as a high school teacher, the demanding market you address as a real estate agent.
What is sacred about my hourly job
bagging two buck chuck at Trader Joe's or my academic load as a college student, my bleak job search and the mounting shame I feel from unemployment or my fundraising efforts as a non-profit worker.
That's the big question for today.
And in fact, it's the modern West version of the big question of human history.
You see, every religion, philosophy, and ideology in history has at its core a stated or implied meaning of life.
some way of living the grind of my ordinary hours that fills my life with a transcendent purpose.
So what is the biblical story that points to Jesus say is the meaning of life, yours, mine, and Alex standing there with blistered thumbs and swollen ankles on the Amazon assembly line.
Well, if we return to Genesis chapter one, which
Bethany read from just a moment ago, you would have heard that people are made in the image of God and that we were given the purpose to rule over the fish and the sea and the birds and the sky and every other living creature that moves along the ground.
So that settles it, doesn't it?
You and I were created to rule.
The meaning of life is to rule.
So tomorrow morning when you're at work and your boss asks you what you're doing on that shared spreadsheet, just say, oh, I'm just ruling over the company profit margins.
I'm ruling over the groceries that I'm bagging and the dough I'm prepping, the children I'm raising, the classroom I'm teaching or the retail I'm selling.
There's a pretty obvious gap between theory and practice there.
Is there not?
So what exactly does Genesis mean by rule?
Well, Genesis was written as one of many ancient Near Eastern creation stories, and Genesis is set apart from all the others in a number of ways, but one of the most rock and roll of them is that in Genesis, people and only people are made in God's image.
And when you and I hear that phrase, we tend to think that that means that we are like God.
We are made like God, so we rule like God.
Sort of.
That's not wrong, but that's not exactly what Genesis is getting at either.
You see rule in ancient context is the image of royalty.
Adam and Eve are the
king and queen of creation, so to speak, ruling and reigning over God's world according to God's image, which is in them.
And somehow the way they run creation over which they've been given royal authority points back to the one who made them.
It glorifies God because it looks like God and reveals God's identity, character, and ultimate intentions to all the rest of creation.
In the ancient Near East, this phrase, the image of God, was actually a quite common one, but it was used to identify the kings of the surrounding ancient Near Eastern nations.
For instance, the Egyptian sun god was called Ra, and the Egyptian pharaoh during the time of Moses is named Ramses, or that's what he calls himself.
That name actually means Ra is the one who begot him.
The kings of the surrounding nations commonly took names incorporating this
image of God's sentiment and they were imagined as divine intermediaries ruling creationism, image of the gods of that particular nation.
The implication being there is one person who images God and everyone else in this society is something less than divine royalty.
Then Genesis comes along making a quite provocative claim
all people are God's image bearers, man, woman, and child, landowner, servant, peasant, and governing official, all of them, all of us are royalty.
Pay attention to the thematic stories that we tell in our culture again and again and again.
Like when you were growing up, what are the movies that you watched repeatedly?
For me,
That was a deep cut.
Did someone say Dracula?
Wow, okay.
For me, it was Aladdin.
And what's the story of Aladdin?
Riff raff, street rat, I don't buy that.
If only they'd look closer.
Would they see a poor boy nursery?
Right?
Thank you.
As you can see, I've got a backup lined up if this pastor thing goes south.
Now, what is that?
That's a rags to riches poverty to royalty story about discovering divine identity.
And we also own Free Willy on VHS.
And I was popping that thing in every day of the summer.
Jesse, an angsty, foster-tossed Portland teenager who has bought a false story of worthlessness, rediscovered true worth when he rules over one of the mightiest of all God's creatures, eventually setting him free when Willy jumps the barge in Astoria, Oregon.
And Jesse divinely reigns by restoring God's creation
to God's image.
Among the highest-grossing films of this year, nominated for all the awards, was Sinner starring Michael B. Jordan, which tells the story of twin brothers that escape a false identity and doubt them by the corrupt Chicago mafia to return home to Mississippi and battle a supernatural enemy threatening the lives of all in their town.
Hang on a second.
So the plot of this film is people
rediscovering their true identity and then engaging in a cosmic supernatural battle against a supernatural deceiver to rescue all of creation?
What does that sound like?
Like the Bible, right?
You see, the point I'm trying to make is that the Genesis claim about human worth and meaning is written on the very first page of Genesis, sure.
But so is it written on the human heart, so much so that the enduring stories that we can't help telling and retelling in new settings and among new characters repeatedly is this in the image of God, Genesis story.
You and I were created in God's royal image and the meaning of life is to rule.
Well, let's say you're a schoolteacher.
I mean, that still leaves you passing out number two pencils and worksheets tomorrow morning, asking the fourth graders in your classroom to start calling you Queen Smith instead of Miss Smith, right?
And claiming you were here to rule over these pop quizzes and the image of the creator, a point being it still leaves a pretty seismic gap between theory and practice.
But Genesis closes that gap.
Let's keep on reading Genesis chapter two, verse 15.
The Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it.
That's the NIV, but the more direct translation you'll find in the majority of English Bibles is work it and keep it.
You and I have been filled with the very image of God and we rule by His divine character and the way that we express that is work and keep.
Now, work is just what it sounds like.
It shows up 289 times in the Hebrew Bible, usually in reference to labor, work that just has to get done to make ends meet.
Keep is even more common, showing up almost 500 times, and it can be translated as keep, watch over, or guard.
It's got more to do with ensuring that God's divine image is preserved where it already is than the spread of his image and character where it's currently lacking.
The late great theologian and pastor Timothy Keller defines Genesis work this way.
Rearranging the raw materials of a particular domain to draw out its potential for the flourishing of everyone.
And that's what you and I are called to do in all of our working and keeping.
To fashion the raw materials entrusted us in our paid and unpaid work.
So don't just think how I make money.
Genesis work includes that, but it's not limited to that.
For instance, I'm a pastor.
And that means that I make money through your generous giving as the writer of biblical teachings, the leader of staff, a disciple maker, and an organizational overseer.
But I'm also a dad.
And I don't get paid for that.
In fact, it's turning out to be quite expensive and financially unsavvy.
And both are parts of the creation work entrusted me right now.
So interpret that for your own life.
Some of us have paid work currently, but all of us have work in the Genesis sense.
Raw materials of my day to day entrusted me by my maker to rule in his royal image.
That's what a farmer does.
works the raw materials of seed, soil, sunlight, and water into food that stalks the shelves of supermarkets for the good of all humanity.
It's what a web developer does, working the raw materials of imagination, equation, and code into a video conferencing platform that allows family members to connect face to face across nations and time zones for the good of all humanity.
It's what a parent does, working the raw materials of genetics, DNA, and human emotion into a well-adjusted, image-bearing adult for the good of all humanity.
And in between the very dignifying, subversive rock and roll of in his image and the working and keeping by which we express that, Genesis gives us a pretty lengthy, objectively boring geography lesson.
A river watering the garden flowed from Eden, and from there it was separated into four headwaters.
The name of the first was Peshon.
It winds to the entire land of Havila, where there is gold.
The gold of that land is good, as opposed to the other type of gold.
Aromantic resin and onyx are also there.
The name of the second river is the Gihon.
It winds to the entire land of Kush.
The name of the third river is the Tigris.
It runs along the east side of Ashur, and the name of the fourth river is the Euphrates.
Let me just offer you a tip when you're reading the Bible.
When you come to a bit that seems overly detailed and superfluous, like a literary editor probably would have redlined it, pay careful attention.
You're almost certainly standing on top of treasure, but you'll have to dig it up.
So let's dig it up.
Let's jump ahead from the Bible's first page to the last page.
Revelation 22, the other portion of our teaching text says,
Then the angels showed me a river, the river of the water of life is clear as crystal flowing from the throne of God and of the lamb down the middle of the great street of the city jumped to verse five and they will reign for ever and ever.
The ending of the biblical story is the expected conclusion, but with a twist.
If God made us his royal rulers, divinely empowered to oversee creation by his image, but we flubbed that job after the serpent's deception.
However, he is renewing that story to its original intent.
Shouldn't the end of the story be a whole bunch of Adam and Eve's back in the Garden of Eden?
A couple of weeks ago, my family had the undeserved privilege of a winter escape to Maui.
And it was pure magic.
And on the very first day there is my children were delighting in the waves and Kay was sitting on a beach chair with their toes in the sand reading a novel.
I decided to take a little walk along the beach and that turned into a short barefoot hike through a little nature trail I discovered.
And that trail then spilled out onto this
private beach that you had to kind of go looking for in order to find.
And as I was nearing the end of that trail and walking out to this clearing and hearing the waves and anticipating this undiscovered sliver of paradise, I finally emerged from the trail absolutely surrounded by naked people.
And not the Hollywood kind either.
I mean like the real kind.
And I'll never unsee the nude beach that I came across.
So as quick as I could, I slipped off my trunks and I'm just kidding.
Just kidding.
I took that as my cue to head back and check in on the boys.
But that's how
Many of us probably imagine Eden if we've been paying attention to the Bible from the beginning of the story, right?
It's a bunch of naked and unashamed people lounging lazily in paradise.
But what we actually get on the Bible's last page is a city.
It's a full of restored image bears dwelling with God just like an Eden, but this isn't a garden.
It's a city.
What's up with that?
Well, you'll never believe it, but the chapter before Revelation 21 includes a pretty lengthy, pretty boring geography lesson on this city, and we discovered that it is made of gold, the good kind, resin, and onyx, among other things.
It eerily mirrors the garden description on the Bible's first page.
In other words,
People have taken the raw materials of God's world and ruled according to God's image, rearranging the garden creatively into a garden city for the flourishing of all God's people.
We remember who we are and God to work.
Of course that's the end.
Because the renewal of all creation certainly includes the renewal of you and me restored to our God given identity, recovering our God given work.
Meaning at least this much, that first Eden was not a product, but a project.
It was given to us by God, assembly required.
So that by living in His creation, by His character, our lives would be
filled with meaning and purpose.
And secondly, that heaven is not a cloudy escape to golden streets, disembodied, blessed and endless chill time.
Heaven is the restoration of this world according to its working order by the collective effort of God's image bearers and ultimately by the reigning authority of the one and only King Jesus.
I've got this vivid memory of a time when in the first
couple weeks of my first child's life.
I came home one evening and I slipped my apartment keys out of my pocket.
I was just about to unlock the door of my place in Brooklyn when I heard a sound coming from the other side of the door.
A sound that made me pause.
It was the sound of weeping.
But it wasn't my infant son weeping, it was my wife.
A Kirsten is the strongest person I know, bar none.
She is tough as nails, effortlessly competent, and independent to a fault.
But she suffered from severe postpartum depression after Hank's birth.
And the woman I knew just disappeared and was replaced by this new mother who was hurting, vulnerable, isolated.
And I listened to a moment to the sound of her wailing, took stock of what I was walking into, and then I opened the door
and did my best to unsuccessfully comfort her that evening.
And then the next morning I got up early, went about my routine, and returned to the office.
I wrote a sermon.
I returned to my pastoral work to the world that I could shape in order to the story that I got to write the ending to.
I ran away from my work as a husband and a father to the world, from the world that I was powerless to order.
From the story that I didn't know the ending to, I chose work, but not with the raw materials God was giving me.
I picked up materials of my own choosing.
And that is one of the greatest regrets of my life.
One that took a very long time for me to realize and confess.
And one that took about as long for Cursed and to authentically and deeply extend forgiveness back to me for, but we are there now and have been for some time.
And I'm not the same person that I was then today.
But there is a word for that for what I chose amid my wife's need.
Workaholism.
Workaholism is when I use my work for my own chosen purposes, not God's creative ones.
And though it is our culture's preferred and most celebrated addiction, it always destroys everyone on its path, including the worker, him or herself.
Just the other night, a neighbor was over for dinner.
We'll call her Alley.
And Ali had just been laid off because some pretty big changes in her company and she was now five weeks into the job search and she described to us the anxiety she wakes up with every Monday morning.
Another week without a schedule, without an agenda, without any working and keeping.
Rest is delightful so long as it's rest from work that I know I'll be returning to, but rest is anxiety when I've got no working and keeping to get my hands dirty with on the other side of it.
In fact, all the data shows that a big savings account does not stop work.
The wealthiest 1% are actually the most likely to overwork and under rest.
Why is that?
Anxiety.
The wealthiest 1% are the most likely to suffer from associating their worth with their work, resulting in anxiety, not freedom when that work is set aside because I'm not sure who I am when I'm holding it.
A few years ago a close friend of mine who we'll call Mick started over.
He moved cross country to a new city and with that shift Mick gave up a salaried position in an office building and a budding local following as a singer-songwriter for a barista job at a local roaster and a few old songs still littered on Spotify.
And I knew he'd moved locally and I'd reached out to him but I hadn't actually
seen him face to face and didn't know he worked at this particular cafe until I stopped by one morning to pick up a cup of coffee and there he was behind the register taking my order.
And what I saw in his face, what he later shared with me that he felt in that moment when I saw him wearing his apron and punching the clock was shame.
He'd gotten used to knowing himself and being known by others with a certain degree of status he garnered from being vocationally stable and established.
And now he was just an hourly worker.
That's his just, not mine.
So what's happening here?
I thought that work was something God blessed, the very first thing that God blessed.
And if that's true, why is it that for me work is instead a source of distraction and dysfunction, a part of my life that I over identify with to the degree that I forget who I am and miss out on God's assignment because I'm creating my own assignments to hold up my own flimsy identity?
Or maybe work for me is a source of anxiety.
It's a part of my life that I need or I need a certain way or with a certain degree of status in order to cope healthily with all the other parts of my life.
Or why is it that for me work has become a source of shame?
Something that I prefer to bury or hide or not talk about or look at because my work tells me all that I'm not rather than all that I am.
Well because unfortunately as I
would assume the majority of us are well aware.
There's a whole lot that happens between the Bible's first and last page.
Here's the short version.
After God blessed work at creation comes a moment in the story commonly called the fall.
A serpent deceived God's royal ones to create their own royalty and try to build their own kingdoms by reaching for the forbidden tree.
And when God reluctantly explained the consequences of that choice, he singled out work as cursed.
Genesis 3 verse 17.
Cursed is the ground because of you through painful toil you will eat from it all the days of your life.
The very ground that Adam was first blessed to work and keep is now cursed by the serpent's temptation and Adam's cooperation.
Now what that doesn't mean is that all work is cursed.
Work is a part of God's design for flourishing and sin doesn't do away with any aspect of God's creation.
Sin corrupts everything.
God redeems everything, including work.
We can still choose Genesis creativity, participation with God.
What this does mean though, is that not all work is blessed, right?
A farmer can work.
With the raw materials to bring forth food and produce life, but that same farmer can also coat their produce with toxins and pesticides, reducing its nutritional value, aiming to maximize profit off of people rather than bless them.
Or a web developer can work raw materials into webcam software connecting families, or a web developer can create a pornography site utilizing the very same technology
in a way that incentivizes humans' trafficking and dehumanizes everyone who comes in contact with it.
And a parent can work with the raw genetic materials of a child into a well-adjusted adult, but a parent can also abuse, neglect, or shame a child to their detriment.
Not all work is blessed and not all work is royal.
Some is cursed and deceptive.
This also means
that even those who do choose blessed work will struggle with it.
They'll be opposed and contested.
They will have to internally fend off their ego again and again and again.
And the creative work they choose will cost them something.
Professional advancement or profit margins or status or what have you.
There's a name for this cursed kind of working and it's neither work nor keep but toil.
through painful toil, you will eat from it all the days of your life.
Now this English term toil, it's the Hebrew Isabon, and it doesn't show up very often in the Bible, but we do find a form of the same word later in Psalm 127.
Unless the Lord builds the house, those who build it labor in vain.
Unless the Lord watches over the city, the watchman stays awake in vain.
It is in vain that you rise up early and go late to rest, eating the bread of anxious toil, for he gives to his beloved sleep.
Work becomes toil when the laborers labor in vain, which is a way of saying the workers forget their place in God's world and try to drum up their own royalty through their work.
You see, we forget our place when work becomes a way for us to try to become everything or nothing.
When we use work, a career track, a promotion, a particular project is a way to affirm our own significance.
Our work poisons us.
That's the Genesis story.
Work was a blessing when it was done in partnership with God.
God was the initiator of all creation work.
And then we joined God as his co-laborers until that one fruit was plucked from that one tree.
That was our first attempt to become the initiator, to become significant apart from God.
In the words of Gene Peterson, work becomes a way to become God-like without dealing with God.
Others of us relate to our work like it's nothing.
They're all materials God has entrusted to us or measured on some scale we got from a source other than God and our identity syncs with the illusion that it may have risen with at another time in our lives.
When work is everything, my identity hangs on my work.
I forget that I'm royalty trying to win the crown that's already sitting on my head.
That's toil.
When work is nothing, my identity still hangs on my work only instead of inflating me
It shames me.
I forget that I'm royalty, assuming that others wear a crown that I don't.
That's toil too.
According to a 2010 study conducted by CNN, worker satisfaction in the U.S. today is at an all-time low with less than 50% of Americans saying that they are satisfied with their jobs.
And simultaneously work-induced depression is historically high with one in every six cases of clinically diagnosed depression being attributed to lack of fulfillment from work.
These are the symptoms of a culture trying to use work to make them everything or nothing.
When a healthy relationship with work was prescribed by the giver in the very rhythm of the creation week, six days of work and a Sabbath day of rest.
both of which are depicted on the Bible's first page as acts of worship.
Sabbath is the practice of keeping our work blessed so it doesn't devolve into anxious toil, for he gives to his beloved sleep."
The psalmist concludes.
We can see that on the pages of the Bible, but we can also just observe it in our own lives.
Right?
Labor and leisure are both good, but they both become anxiety when they aren't complimented by one another.
Labor is a blessing when rest is coming, but it's toil if it's just endless work with no rest.
And leisure is a blessing when work awaits me on the other side, but it's anxious toil when I have no work to return to.
Just ask your friend who was laid off for a while back and is still on the job hunt, how much they're enjoying all the free leisure time.
Every day must be vacation, right?
Nope.
Rest without work is anxious toil because God blessed our work.
Thankfully, the fall is followed by a long story of redemption.
In the Bible's second book, Exodus, we were introduced to Bezalel.
Then the Lord said to Moses, this is Exodus 31,
See, I have chosen Bezalel, son of Uri, the son of her of the tribe of Judah, and I have filled him with the spirit of God, with wisdom, with understanding, with knowledge, and with all kinds of skills, to make artistic designs for work in gold, silver, and bronze, to cut and set stones, to work in wood, and to engage in all kinds of crafts.
Bezalel in the chapters that follow becomes the architect of the original temple.
He draws up the blueprints for the house that God's going to come to dwell in, but check this out.
He was filled with the spirit of God for that work.
This is the first time on the pages of the Bible, anyone has been described as being filled with his spirit.
The first time in biblical history, anyone was said to be filled with the spirit of God.
It wasn't Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, or Moses.
It was Bezalel.
And the first time we're told someone was filled with the spirit, it was not to deliver a prophetic word or offer a prayer for miraculous healing.
It was for work, white collar work, like architecture and design and blue collar work, like laying bricks, making measurements and cutting wood.
God's redemption then reaches its climax, of course, in the person of Jesus.
And how does Jesus introduce himself as the king of an everlasting kingdom, royalty?
Is Genesis language...
At the very end of his life, the night before he was going to the cross to defeat death at the very meal where he taught us to remember him, Jesus says to his disciples, Luke chapter 22.
And I confer on you a kingdom just as my father conferred one on me so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones judging the 12 tribes of Israel.
I'm making you all of you in my kingdom, royal rulers again, Jesus says.
That's Genesis language.
And he doesn't say, I'm making you royalty so you can lounge and eat grapes on the nude beach.
Right.
He says so that you can sit on thrones judging.
Jesus is talking about work.
What I'm about to do over the next 72 hours through the cross and empty tumors, restore your identity and recover your meaning, your purpose, your work.
A renewal project completed when Jesus returns to reign as king, the very light at the center of the garden city.
That is the biblical story of our work.
And this is the introduction of a new teaching series that will carry us through the season of Lent all the way up to Easter Sunday.
The good news about our bodies is exactly what it sounds like.
A teaching series all about the body and the way of Jesus.
God relates to us through every way he's made us, body, mind, and spirit.
But in the West as a society and in the Western church across traditions, we tend to relate to God through only two out of those three.
The mind absolutely, we are among the most rationalistic, intellectually biased people to ever live.
And the spirit, well that's a bit more mysterious.
because it evokes thought of the emotional world.
But sure, we assume there's something going on deeper than the intellect through which God meets us and makes us appeal to us.
The body though?
Even in the church, we tend to get our understanding of the body primarily through the secular imagination, not the biblical one.
And that means most of us know our bodies mainly as carriers of our brain or projects to sculpt and outwardly perfect tools for pleasure
or sources of shame and angst either because we don't like our particular bodies or because my particular body in some obvious way is not operating according to divine design.
So in the days ahead, we're going to tackle suffering and chronic illness, gender and sexuality, desire gratified and deferred,
And the practice for this series as we gather in our Bridgetown communities midweek will be fasting through the weekly exercise of renunciation, laying down a neutral appetite, habit or activity in order to make more space to be met deeply by the love of God.
And today we have gotten our start with the bodily occupation of work, which sounds profoundly dignifying and empowering, but
Tomorrow is a Monday morning.
So how exactly do you live in line with the story this grand tomorrow when you drive the kids to school or arrive at staff meeting, flip the restaurant lights on or go to class?
Well, in practice, the Jesus story of our work does not mean choosing new work, at least not for the majority of us.
Rather, it means three shifts in relationship to your current work.
First,
from working for the weekend to working for renewal.
Byron Borger wrote a beautiful article about searching for the genesis work in his retail job.
He was unsatisfied with explanations like, well, maybe consider tithing off the company profits or be extra kind to your coworkers or pray for all of your customers because those all seemed like ministry tasks imported into his secular environment.
but what was uniquely redemptive about his work, he wondered, within that secular environment.
And as he contemplated walking the razor's edge between living the way of Jesus and needing to make ends meet to pay the mortgage and put food on the table, he notices something that his retail work, which was in his case, the selling of books, touches plenty of people in lots of other industries.
Every time he sells a book, there are so many different people that he's linking arms with, writers and editors, graphic designers, publicists, sales reps, accountants, wholesalers, distributors, USPS and other delivery workers, all of them are necessary partners in his work and beneficiaries of his sales, that all that's going on when he rings up the total for your book at his bookstore.
I mean, his work,
is a constant reminder to him of two kingdom principles.
First, I cannot do it alone.
Even when I'm in the shop alone selling a book, I'm linking arms with countless others.
My flourishing or failing is communal.
And secondly, because his work benefits so many, his work is an expression of what's often called common grace.
the provision of God for countless people, those following Jesus and those who are not yet.
In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus teaches he causes the sun to rise on the evil and the good and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
If you love only those who love you, what reward will you get?
Are not even the tax collectors doing that?
And if you greet only your own people, what more are you doing than others?
Do not even the pagans do that.
be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect to image the Father most closely, most perfectly, according to Jesus looks like benefiting my neighbor indiscriminately.
And that is what Byron's doing when he sells books.
Here is what it means for him to work for renewal in retail.
to do his work humbly and awareness of partnership with others and graciously in celebration of benefit to others.
So how about you?
What does it mean for you in your industry to work for renewal?
If you're not sure where to begin in answering that question, I suggest starting where Byron did, just asking God for an anchor point in Scripture to hold on to, asking him to show you, is there some place you could draw me to in the pages of the Bible where your divine invitation overlaps with my daily grind?
If you don't know where to start, ask the Holy Spirit for help, be patient.
It's just soon he's going to get back to you.
As it turns out, there is no such thing as sacred and secular work.
To return to where we began, God is no more interested or invested in Alex pastoral work than he was in Alex Amazon warehouse work.
And God is no more interested in your Bible reading, praying or inconsistent, but sincere attempt at cultivating a practice of solitude than he is in
your daily work.
Do you know that there is no Hebrew word for spiritual?
If you ask an ancient Israelite like Bezalel or Jesus about their spiritual life that have no idea what you're talking about, all of life is spiritual, including or maybe even especially your paid and unpaid work.
In general, pastors in recent Western church history have lived like God's dream for your life is for you to become increasingly employed in their thing.
Right?
You should devote more and more and more of your time and energy to my church, which is an oxymoronic concept in and of itself.
This is the tragic result.
of pairing pastoral ministry with the ego of an individual and then building my church empire rather than bringing Jesus's kingdom.
And for that, as a pastor, on behalf of pastors, I want to say to you, I am so very sorry.
Here is the truth.
God is interested, maybe even particularly interested in your work.
Your ordinary life,
is where the kingdom comes.
And he has vested me with a sacred responsibility to lay my life down in loving service for you, to try my best to shepherd you on the narrow path that leads to great life in all of those ordinary places that you follow him.
Second shift from half to to get to a
Local mother of five wrestled with guilt because she took very seriously Jesus's teachings on care for the poor, but her life was largely removed from the neediest of her neighbors in Portland.
I was like, surely if Jesus was living in my city, he'd be found among the homeless, the addicted, the widow and the orphan, right?
Yes, I absolutely agree with that in principle, but working the line at the soup kitchen for her seemed impossible because she was working the line in her own kitchen.
And then one day it hit her that her own kids were always needing something.
I'm hungry.
I'm thirsty.
Play with me.
I need to go to the bathroom.
I spilled my juice.
They were helpless without her.
They were needy.
And she began to recognize the face of Jesus on the faces of her five little ones.
She began to treat them as Jesus treats the vulnerable on the pages of the gospels.
And she began to hear Jesus asking her the sound of her own children's voices.
When was I thirsty and you gave me something to drink?
When was I hungry and you gave me something to eat?
When was I naked and you clothed me?
This mom had to overcome the lie that spirituality happens in environments other than her most common one.
It was then that she discovered her Genesis work, not by changing what she was doing, but by changing how she was engaging, what she was already doing, and finding that God was not beyond her every day, but within her every day.
Not new work to do, but a new way to do the work that she was already doing.
The work she had to do was then converted into the work she gets to do.
Brother Lawrence in his famous practice in the presence of God says, our sanctification does not depend on changing our works, but in doing that for God's sake, which we commonly do for our own.
A Christ defined way to be a mom or executive or restaurant server or general contractor or receptionist.
And the final shift from success to service.
I've never been that into television shows that span multiple seasons, but there was a period of my life when I just could not get enough of West Wing.
Anybody else?
We could use Jed Bartlett on the next election ticket if you ask me, but that's a bit off the plot, so I'll just stick with...
Whenever I hear service, the word service to this day, I think of Josh Lyman.
I serve at the pleasure of the president.
Right, all that he does is service to another.
This was his way of healthily differentiating himself from the results of his own work.
Look, maybe I'll get to see and even taste the fruit of the work I'm putting in and maybe I won't either way.
Look, I serve with the pleasure of the president.
Jeremiah Everts was a Yale educated lawyer living in the early 19th century.
And at that same time and in that same place, there was a historic awakening sweeping through the American church and he got swept up in it and his heart was captured by Jesus.
And as a result of that, he devoted the last 15 years of his life to defending the rights of the Cherokee tribe of Native Americans, mounting a public defense against the forcible removal of the Cherokees from the state of Georgia.
Everett's published 24 essays, laying out his case, made his argument based on the U.S.
Constitutional Law, and published popular essays, rooting his argument in the biblical narrative.
He lobbied about the White House and Congress, appealed to presidents John Adams and Andrew Jackson, and held many meetings with individual Congress members.
And eventually, Everett's lost.
But he didn't give up.
He then appealed to the Supreme Court, only to be denied.
The Cherokee tribe was forcibly removed from the state of Georgia and made to march all the way to Oklahoma and what we commonly call today the trail of tears.
Jeremiah Everts failed.
He tried to engage his legal profession as an agent of renewal in the name of Jesus and he failed.
And that's why we don't know his name alongside names like Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela, Desmond Tutu and William Wilberforce.
Jeremiah Everts gave it his best shot, but he came up short of success.
But I wonder what his legacy is in the Garden City, in the kingdom that outlasts all the others.
Jeremiah Everts served at the pleasure of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and Jesus never asked Jeremiah to change the hearts of Supreme Court justices.
That's something only God can do.
Jesus did ask him to lay down his life in loving service for others by raising his voice for the voiceless and offering his intellect and skill set for the renewal of the world according to God's original design.
to believe in and advocate for the marginalized and to try to help them, to not give up no matter how high the cost, to go after them with the very tenacity that Jesus came after him, to pray for them relentlessly and to advocate for them as his own flesh and blood, because that is who they are.
And so for what Jesus asked him to do, Jeremiah Everts was a raging success.
What is success for you vocationally?
And who gave you your definition of success?
I wonder if success in Jesus' kingdom might require some of us to put to death, to nail to the cross the definition of success given us by a lesser king.
And what if there on the other side of that death, there's a kind of life that never dies, a resurrection life,
a way to work right now that takes your ordinary labor and ordinary days and weaves them into the tapestry of eternal redemption.
What if we were people who stopped climbing the ladder and started serving at the pleasure of the King?
Thanks for joining the Bridgetown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved,
Visit Bridgetown.church slash welcome.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgetown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at Bridgetown.church slash giving.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.